Welcome in this lecture.
We are going to be learning how we can simulate something called Lanke.
We're going to be learning how what language is and why it affects our games so badly and we're going
to be applying it in a simulated fashion to our game which will cause a glitching and weird rotating
and resetting like we're seeing here.
And we're going to talk a little bit about why that is the case so let's dive in and see how this works.
So you might be thinking they were going to a stage in the game right now where we are able to synchronize
the state between the client server and it seems to be working pretty smoothly whether you are the authoritative
proxy whether you are authoritative sorry whether you are the autonomous proxy or whether you are a
simulated proxy.
However this is because we haven't introduced quite an important concept in computer networks the concept
of lag.
So let's talk about what is this lag concept and how does it affect our game play.
But before we talk about what lag is we need to understand the concept of packets and network rooting
and basically how the Internet talks how the Internet talks to each other and sends messages.
So if you think about how you would have sent a message back in the old days before telephones then
you may have done it by writing your message down on a piece of paper just like this one on the slides
then stuffed the envelope and put an address on the envelope.
Then you would have given this envelope to a postman and the postman would have given it someone else
who'd give it someone else.
And eventually it would reach the address on the envelope and hopefully the person you intended would
open the envelope and read the message and that's what we do.
More or less in computer networks as well.
Except we don't have a postman and will talk about that in just a second.
So what we do in a computer network is we write a message.
In this case we write our message in binary in such a way that the recipient will understand.
So what are these messages in the unreel client server examples that we've been looking at the server
might write a message to the client saying I have updated property X to value Y or it might be the client
saying to the server He is an APC that I want to call on you and this will be formatted in binary via
some pre agreed standard.
Then we write an address or rather unreel rights an address of the client or server on the envelope.
And this means that.
Without opening the envelope without having a look inside the post man can deliver to an address right.
You don't have to look at the message.
The same goes with the Internet.
The packet has the address on it in the header and all that needs to be done by the rooting framework
the rooting infrastructure is it needs to look at the address doesn't need to look at the message it
can leave the message in tactic you just need to copy that on but it looks at the address to figure
out where it needs to send this packet.
So that's the idea a packet imagine and letter in an envelope.
So then what we get are these rooting infrastructures these networks of routers all connected up as
you can see in this diagram here that allow us to get from computer to computer B.
Now what is a router router is a piece of kit that basically you plug lots of ethane at cables in to
you and they communicate via some protocols over those ethe net cables to deliver and copy your packets
from one interface to the other from one place to another.
So what happens if we have put together a packet on our computer and want to get it over to the other
computer Well we're going to pass this packet up to the first router that we're connected to the router
is going to look at the address and he's going to figure out which is the next route I should send it
to and so on and so on until it gets to the destination like so and that's great because we've got some
abstraction there by having put our message in an envelope.
Now our routers don't need to understand the message they can just work at a higher level of abstraction
of this address and we don't have to understand what the architecture of and network is.
Just like when you give a letter to your postman you don't have to understand where the postman is going
to take it.
Which distribution centres are going to be used and the whole process in which Laurie they're going
to use at what time and so on and so forth.
You can just give it to the postman and know that because you put the address on it's going to get to
the destination.
Same thing happens with Internet packets and for all we care.
We could create another packet and it could go through a different route on the network and end up at
the same destination it doesn't matter how the network is set up and where it goes.
It just needs to get to the destination.
Now why are Internet networks set up this way.
Why do they have these routers.
Why do we not just connect each node to every other node.
Well that seems pretty obvious because we'd have a lot of cables but also imagine this case where you
have lots of Route lots of computers that are maybe on a local area network all connected up to one
router.
Because that's very easy you've got even at cables that you can run from one computer up to the router
and that's great and then you've got one very expensive line here that for example might be going under
the ocean to a computer.
On the other side of the globe.
So that's a very expensive line to put down you wouldn't want to have to put down five lines to connect
each one of these computers up to this computer on the right.
You're much better off putting some cheap lines into a router and then using only one expensive line
over to the computer on the right.
And that's one of the great things about the Internet is it allows us to have all these computers simultaneously
talking to this one the right in a telephone network.
For example if computer one at the top here wants to talk to the computer on the right he would have
to reserve this line that goes under the ocean and that means that these other four computers wouldn't
get to speak until he decided that he's finished with that phone call.
Now obviously this isn't a great idea.
And in packet switch networks which are the ones we're talking about you can send these packets of data
which are reasonably small and you can even to leave them on the wire so you can say I'll send this
packets reasonably small then I'll send the next packet from another person and so on and so forth.
So in order to do this we need to have a queue.
Why do we need to have a queue.
Because the capacity of this line the speed at which we can send data down it is not going to be as
big as five of these lines.
So if all five computers were trying to send a message to the computer on the right then they would
basically jam up this line and they won't be able to send that thing down.
So what we do is we receive a message from one of the computers on the left and we stick it in a queue
and we send it as fast as we possibly can over to a computer on the right.
And if we get another message while we're still sending then we put it in memory in a queue and we wait
for the first message to finish before we start on a second one and so on with the third message we
just stick it on the back of the queue.
But we've got a limited amount of memory in our router.
So what can happen is that will get a message that overflows AQ that is too much for AQ got more messages
than we can fit in memory.
And this message will end up getting dropped.
So that's why I've called this slide best effort delivery because we aren't guaranteeing in an Internet
network that the packet will reach the destination only sometimes will it be able to reach the destination
and there's many ways that we use to work around this building game engines.
We try not to do that because we want the best performance possible.
So we do end up with some packets and some messages getting dropped which either means we have to send
them or we just don't get that message happens.
So that's why we have reliable by the way on our ipc messages because if we don't put reliable they
may be in a packet that gets dropped and the game engine won't check and won't try again.
So the other problem here is that when you've got a queue obviously as you probably have experienced
with your cues in real life you're at the supermarket maybe at customs you may have experienced that
cues take time.
You have to wait for the package ahead of you to finish sending which introduces a delay in your packet
getting from A to B.
So that is what I want to show you here is the concept of lag and how it happens over time.
So we start off by sending a packet.
Now time here is running along the bottom from left to right.
And Senate pack it takes time because of the queuing delays just because of the fact that the speed
of light is limited so we're sending something across the globe it will take a little bit of time just
to for that message to travel in the wire across the globe.
But most of this time is actually spent in queuing delays and processing delays by the routers.
So it takes a bit of time to get from Cuba a to compute B and the more routers are in the mix and the
further away it is the heart the longer that time is going to be when you have received the packet then
B has to do some processing on the message in order to figure out what they want to do with it.
And they may want to send a reply back to a which also takes time and then they have to figure out what
they want to do with that packet.
So all of this taken as a whole the time from first sending a packet from a to understanding and receiving
the reply.
Its called a round trip time.
And this is what we typically refer to as a lag is the time it takes for us to update the server on
what we're doing.
So telling the server Hey I have decided to accelerate forward and the time between having sent that
and receiving an update saying here is your new position after having accelerated forward.
That's all a round trip time in the longer.
That is the more lag you have in your game or the more latency you have.
So how do we go ahead and try out a game with lag.
How do we test that our game can work when we have a lag.
Well there is a blog post here that I've got linked in the resources called Finding network based exploits.
And here it talks a little bit about the options you have in and real for simulating this lag so you
don't have to set up a test network to experience this lag you can have the engine automatically introduce
the lags into the messages that you are trying to send.
Now the way we can do this is go and fire up your game either in the editor or a standalone.
Either one is going to work here and then we are going to put these at games side by side and I'm going
to select the client one and open up the console with a key underneath escape and the command we want
is net with the capital N capital and space capital P K T.
So the packet lag spelt like this and we can set that equal to 1000 1000 is in milliseconds so this
is just one second of lag which is quite high but will definitely make it obvious what the problems
can be.
So if I go ahead and drive my car first it seems fine but then you notice I skip backwards and I keep
skipping backwards a little bit as I drive the car now skipping has stopped.
Now that I've not I'm not introducing any new inputs but if I try and accelerate again you'll notice
that I had to skip back.
And if I start to turn this becomes even more obvious.
There you go.
Totally weird how it's jumping around like this.
And we're going to have a little look at why that's the case.
But first I want to just to show you that there are a few other options from this blog post so let's
go ahead and look at the blog post.
You can use them in and same way as I just used lag.
They just have a different meaning so there is packet lag variance.
This introduces some variants some randomness to the lag and this might be because there's more or less
congestion it might be because we route through different routes out in a real network.
But that's what we're trying to simulate we're saying that it will add or subtract with a little bit
randomness in this amount of milliseconds you can add some packet loss so you can say what percentage
of packets are going to be discarded.
That is again because of queues filling up and as dropping the packets you can actually have packet
duplication as well.
Now packet duplication happens in a real network for a variety of reasons one of them might be that
you think that your packet has got lost when in fact it's just been really delayed and so you send a
second time.
And so you end up with your packet of twice and then there's packet order which is just on or off which
is whether the packets end up out of order at the other end and you really have one to enable this zero
to disable this.
Again this could be because your packets take two different routes one takes longer than the other and
they arrive out of order all of those reasons.
You can see from the diagrams on the slides but these are the properties you can use in unreel to simulate
them.
And if you have a look at this blog post it also shows you how you could put this into your engine or
any file.
But for me I'm going to be doing it just via the console for now because that's easy enough and we can
see most of what we want to see just by introducing a constant lag and that's what I'm doing.
So your challenge in this lecture is going to be trying to figure out why the car is glitching by playing
around little bit for yourself.
So I'd like you to enable the lag at using the console just like I showed you play around with the game
and see if you can figure out why it's glitching.
Take a look at what the server is seeing that might give you some clues as well.
And can you explain why the game is glitching don't go as far as only explaining to yourself.
I'd like you to write up the explanation and put it in the form as well so pause the video and have
a go.
Okay so let's have a go at trying to explain why lag causes glitching So we're going to go into our
game and have a go at driving around as the autonomous proxy's you see it did just glitch right away
there.
And I'm going to try and do it from you.
Basically in front of the authority so that we can see what the car is doing.
So let's try that.
Go and put ourselves in front of Harold Thomas proxy like so just set up the stage a little bit and
then swap into being the autonomous proxy and try and drive around.
Now what you'll see is that from me starting to accelerate to the authority seeing me accelerate there
is a delay.
There is a lag and it's about one second.
It seems that or maybe half a second I didn't really time it.
So we're not really sure whether the lag that we're introducing is the whole round trip time or just
half of it.
But that sort of explains what's going on because when we receive an update from the server that server
is already behind us and is updating us with stale information basically which means that while we've
been simulating we've got a little bit ahead and the server is resetting us back to where we were before.
Let's see that little bit clearer in a diagram.
So here we have the server and the client both of them are simulating and we're going to just take into
just assume that we have one dimension at the moment which is our position and we are trying to accelerate
forward.
So we start off at the position zero both on the client the autonomous proxy and on the authority of
the server then we receive an excelerate input.
The accelerator goes down full throttle mid frame and in then and at this point we send a message up
to the server using our Peacey which as we know is now going to take time because of that lag.
So what happens is in the next tick the client says oh I've got the accelerator down I'm going to move
forward by one place.
The server on the other hand has not yet received that the accelerator is down.
So they are not moving anywhere.
So we're staying at zero we can already see that there's a problem here.
They're already out of sync.
Then the second step the client carries on moving forward because he thinks he's moving forward.
The server only just now has realized that he's moving forward to update the position to one.
And on updating the position to one or after that time we get maybe a net update in this net update
we send that position down to the client saying hey you have got a new value for one.
I've just calculated it out but in the meantime we've carried on simulating we have any see that net
update on a client so the client is going to go all the way over to three and it's going to look to
the player like he is in position 3 at this point but the server has just sent an update which means
that we have to reset our position to one and in the next tick will still be moving forward.
So we're going to go to position two and you can see that now we have just been reset back to that old
state of the server and we've experienced that as a player we've experienced a glitch where we have
jumped back from position 3 to position.
Now this is clearly a very difficult problem to solve because we can't get rid of these delays.
There's no way that the server could have known any earlier about the update client and there's no way
that the client could have known any earlier that the server had actually updated its state.
So we are going to be looking in the next lecture as a method that we can use to alleviate some of this
pain.
We can never really remove the lagging but we can try and make the experience better for the client.
I'll see you in that lecture.